# PSYCH-201-Green-Sea-Turtles
Razhan Kamal razhan.kamal001@umb.edu -
Nansy Hernandez nansy.hernandez001@umb.edu -
Shannon Cantan shannon.cantan001@umb.edu -
Markia Gooding markia.gooding001@umb.edu -
Keneisha Newton keneisha.newton001@umb.edu -
Linda Aualom linda.aualom001@umb.edu

Green Sea Turtle (Chelonia mydas) An endangered species. Green Sea turtles are the world’s largest species of hard-shelled sea turtle of the Cheloniidae family. The green sea turtle is the only herbivore among different species and the largest found was 5 ft and 871 lbs. The Green Sea Turtle body is oval shaped, their head is small and blunt, no teeth jaws serrated which is suited for their diet. Their shells consist of single pair prefrontal scales in front of their eyes rather than two pairs as found on other sea turtles, carapace is color pale to dark green, and yellow, bony without ridges, and has large non-overlapping, hard scales also called scutes with only four lateral scuted. The average size is 3-4 ft, 240-420 lbs. They have ecdodermic body temperatures regulated by the temperature of the water around them, and the number of arrangements of these scutes can determine their species. The Green Sea Turtles can breathe air, have the ability under natural conditions to remain submerged for hours at a time. They spend most of their life at sea, returning to warm climate beaches with seagrass beds near coastline to nest in two year intervals, and lay an average 115 eggs in each nest, nesting 3-5 times per season. There is an alarming decline in their populations by cold-stunning climate changes.
	
	
The First hypothesis discusses how the cold-stunning problem is causing Green Sea turtles to decrease. Cold-stunning is the main cause of serious injuries for green sea turtles in Massachusetts, and as the main cause of concern is extreme temperature rises in our water, we hypothesize that reversing climate change within the Gulf of Maine by banning industrial waste within 50 miles of water can reverse ill effects of major rises in local bodies of water. The reason the cold-stunning is an issue is because the gulf of Maine is warming faster than 99% of the ocean. The climate change and cold-stunning put pressure on green sea turtles, exposing them to greater existential threats. The green sea turtle's from the day they hatch life is a struggle for survival from injuries or even getting pneumonia.  The cold-stunning problem is why 2,300 green sea turtles become stranded trying to migrate south, getting trapped in 50 degree waters in mid November and they become disoriented to cold to eat, drink or swim then they become cold-stunned. The sea turtles venture in the gulf of Maine during warm months, become hypothermic and slow moving when colder winter waters arrive making it harder to escape. Hypothermic cold-stunned sea turtles experience debilitating lethargic conditions, which can lead to death. If we create a canal it will help solve the problem by allowing  the sea turtles another route to escape quick enough before the climate changes, avoiding them getting cold-stunned.


The second hypothesis talks about how the hook of Cape Cod's shape makes it difficult for green sea turtles who accidentally enter Cape Cod from the Gulf of Maine to exit when temperatures cool, creating a canal to create a pathway in its hook shaped form will lessen cold-stunning based injuries from green sea turtles. More than 30 years sea turtles are getting stranded along Cape Cod’s during the cold winter season October-December. The sea turtles are getting stuck in between Cape Cod’s hook shape becoming disoriented in the currents, unable to escape the cooling waters quick enough to migrate South to where the warmer water temperatures are. The cycle of sea turtles being stranded and rehabilitation happens yearly. “Cold-Stunned” turtles are rescued after washing up on beaches. The Cold-Stunned sea turtles are rescued, rapidly transported to the sanctuary then to the New England Aquarium for evaluation and rehabilitation. The Kemp Ridley’s (Lepidochelys kempii) sea turtles most commonly found stranded & injured from being cold-stunned on Cape Cod Beaches.
Creating a Canal will decrease injuries & help sea turtles to migrate fast enough, by having another exit to escape the cold water temperatures. If we create a canal it will help sea turtles avoid the hook shaped by having  a straight path to escape without getting stuck.


 The third hypothesis speaks about how reducing the pollution in the water by 10 percent would increase the sea turtle population by 10 percent through the elongation of their life span. The sea turtle’s environment greatly influences how long their life span is and what quality of life they would have. Turtles age due to wear and tear on their bodies rather than due to chronological age. Turtles living in unhealthy environments are more susceptible to death and disease, which ultimately leads to death. One major pollution issue that sea turtles are currently facing is plastic pollution. This has had a detrimental impact on the health of marine turtles. Reducing the pollution level in the ocean would directly improve the quality of life for sea turtles and their life span. 
 
 
 The fourth hypothesis speaks about how turtles help to maintain the coral ecosystem and bring nutrients to the beach shore, therefore concluding that lowering speed limits for boats in areas where sea turtles reside will lower the pollution level by 10 percent. Marine turtles are known to remove algae from coral reef plants and fertilize the roots of dune plants. The presence of humans has greatly altered the flow and distribution of nutrients that are transported by sea turtles. They help introduce a flow of nutrients on beaches through their nests as well. This is why we have hypothesized that reducing human activity would have a positive effect on the turtle population.
 
 
 The fifth hypothesis discusses the importance of coral reefs. There are currently 6.5 million turtles around the world which is a 2/3 decrease since the turn of the 20th century. Additionally, coral reefs have gone down by 14 percent since 2008. This is why, we hypothesize that we could reverse the loss of coral reefs by increasing the population of green sea turtles by creating more turtle only sanctuaries within the United States. Coral reefs are important to protect coastlines from storms and erosion and source of food and new medicines. Over 1.2 billion people depend on coral reefs for food, income, and protection. The Densities of endangered green sea turtles are increasing due to Pacific coral reefs so it’s important to reverse the loss. The Green sea turtles have long been endangered due largely to destruction of coral reef habitat, but  the institution of global protection efforts is working on reversing this decline.
 
 
Healthy coral reefs provide habitat to green sea turtles. Green sea turtles help coral reef ecosystems remain productive & healthy & play an important role maintaining the food web balance transporting essential nutrients from oceans, to beaches & coastal dunes. Sea turtles going extinct dune vegetation will lose major sources of nutrients and would not be as healthy & strong enough to maintain dunes resulting in increased erosion. If we increase our sea turtles it’s beneficial to help the coral reefs which is important for our ecosystems.
The chosen hypothesis is hypothesis one, which is the cold-stunning problem causing Green Sea turtles to decrease. Cold-stunning is the main cause of serious injuries for green sea turtles in Massachusetts, and as the main cause of concern is extreme temperature rises in our water, we hypothesize that reversing climate change within the Gulf of Maine by banning industrial waste within 50 miles of water can reverse ill effects of major rises in local bodies of water.


In 2013 the New England Aquarium opened the Turtle Hospital in Quincy MA> According to Adam Kennedy, the Director of the Turtle Hospital, the average number of turtles per year was 34, 10 years later in 2023 the number had risen to 384. While the National number of turtle injuries is a result of improper equipment and turtles getting caught in nets, far and away the biggest cause of injury for turtles in New England is Cold Stunning. Cold stunning is when water drops below 50 degrees where Sea Turtles are present, due to the inability of reptiles to regulate their body temperature, sea turtles stuck in this cold climate often suffer from hypothermia, pneumonia, and worse. Climate change has been the main reason for this increase, the temperatures in the Gulf of Maine has increased, so more turtles have been able to migrate into Cape Cod, turtles have a natural instinct to go south when temperatures start dropping; however, because of the strange shape of Cape Cod, sea turtles struggle to find their way out of Cape Cod, which leads to long-term cold stunning. 


Climate Change is the leading cause of injury for Sea Turtles in New England. as mentioned by Susan Nickerson, executive director of Nantucket Soundkeeper, a non-profit organization dedicated to cleaning up Coastal Waters in New England Human caused wastewater is the No. 1 contaminant of coastal waters," According to a study done by Colorado University, dumping waste is a direct cause of Climate change. 
In 1792, the first textile mill was created in the Black Stone Valley, starting the industrial revolution. In 1990, The Blackstone River was deemed, “the most polluted river in the country”. By the EPA. Congress passed the clean water bill in 1972, and despite the centuries of damage, Black Stone River has been cleaned up to the point where both forestry and animals have returned after centuries. This is why we hypothesize that, if we regulate the amount of manufacturing companies near waterways, we can reverse damage to sea turtles by pausing climate change.


Based on this Hypothesis and the evidence gathered, we conclude the ethical issues that may arise are economical. If we are to limit Industrial Manufacturers near the coast, it can be argued that the ethical ramifications will be economical - limiting blue-collar workers in particular who hold these labor positions. According to research done following layoffs in 2011, positions were replaced rather than eliminated. In other words, those who lost jobs were put into an equivalent position within the realms of environmental control practically at a 1 to 1 rate. While there was no significant gain in transitioning to a pro-environment method, there was also no job loss to speak of. This is why, when it comes to potential job loss for existing workers in the industrial manufacturing industry a policy will be past that equivalent positions will be created in the environmental section at a rate of 1 job added for every 1 job loss, those who lose their positions from these changes shall have 1st choice in equivalent positions that are created from this policy. In positives that are not job related though, we can compare previous policies that have already been utilized, for example in 2011 the EPA finalized a rule that curbed Upwind sources from impairing air in downwind states.  Based on research Jobs_and_Regulation_Factsheet.pdf (policyintegrity.org) EPA found this rule could save between 120 and 280 billion dollars in net benefits, including prevention of up to 34,000 premature human deaths a year. In short, while the control may not show an immediate change for the unemployment rate, it is undeniable that this change will be better for well-being for both humans and turtles alike. 



Qualitative Data Analysis will be looked at based on the health, good will, and positive environmental impact of our research. 
•	If we take the numbers from a bill passed by the Environmental Protection Agency in 2011, reversing Climate change could save almost 50,000 more human lives, but also the quality of our public waters and land animals. 
•	Quantitative Analysis that will be included is data on injured turtles once climate change is reversed, how much money will go back into the economy when there is less clean up and health risk, and data on the decrease of industrial waste.
•	Independent variable Turtle, Dependent variable is the Ocean, as we have no control over how the & the ocean reacts, we can only observe and hypothesize that based on such correlations as warmer waters leading to more injured turtles, that less waste= more turtles.
•	We will take data that was given to us from the turtle sanctuary in Quincy Mass that says in 2011 compared to data from 2022 where the injured turtles increased 12-fold from cold stunning due to climate change, that all industrial manufacturing plants leaving coast lines will reverse damage that has been caused, we will do natural observations and believe that this can be done with positive results.


Works Cited :

Griffin, L. P., Griffin, C. R., Finn, J. T., Prescott, R. L., Faherty, M., Still, B. M., & Danylchuk, A. J. (2019). Warming seas increase cold-stunning events for Kemp’s ridley sea turtles in the northwest Atlantic. PLOS ONE, 14(1), e0211503. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211503
Information About Sea Turtles: An Introduction – Sea Turtle Conservancy. (2019). Conserveturtles.org. https://conserveturtles.org/information-about-sea-turtles-an-introduction/
Information about sea turtles: Green Sea Turtle. Sea Turtle Conservancy. (n.d.). https://conserveturtles.org/information-sea-turtles-green-sea-turtle/ 
Kobilinsky, D. (2019, February 19). Why are so many sea turtles being stranded in Cape Cod? The Wildlife Society. https://wildlife.org/why-are-so-many-sea-turtles-being-stranded-in-cape-cod/
Poppick, L. (2018, November 12). Why Is the Gulf of Maine Warming Faster Than 99% of the Ocean? Eos. https://eos.org/features/why-is-the-gulf-of-maine-warming-faster-than-99-of-the-https://eos.org/features/why-is-the-gulf-of-maine-warming-faster-than-99-of-the-ocean
Sea Turtles on Cape Cod. (2023). Mass Audubon. https://www.massaudubon.org/get-outdoors/wildlife-sanctuaries/wellfleet-bay/about/our-conservation-work/sea-turtles

Bjorndal, K. A., Bolten, A. B., Dellinger, T., Delgado, C., & Martins, H. R. (2003, May 1). Compensatory growth in oceanic loggerhead sea ... - wiley online library. https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1890/0012-9658%282003%29084%5B1237%3ACGIOLS%5D2.0.CO%3B2 
Miller, K. (2022, July 18). What turtles can teach humans about the science of slow aging. Wired. https://www.wired.com/story/what-turtles-can-teach-humans-about-the-science-of-slow-aging/ 
Goatley, C. H. R., Hoey, A. S., & Bellwood, D. R. (2012, June 29). The role of turtles as Coral Reef macroherbivores. PLOS ONE. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0039979 
Bouchard, S. S., & Bjorndal, K. A. (2000, August 1). SEA TURTLES AS BIOLOGICAL TRANSPORTERS OF NUTRIENTS AND ENERGY FROM MARINE TO TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS. https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1890/0012-9658%282000%29081%5B2305%3ASTABTO%5D2.0.CO%3B2?casa_token=_q0sqOm_pt8AAAAA%3AWl5bKuxMIpWsuPkuhn20OV8NmKc2WmeHihxwmwj0eiR6xDi-vp-I5hfOKJ4nQfT
Hannan, L. B., Roth, J. D., Ehrhart, L. M., & Weishample, J. F. (2007). DUNE VEGETATION FERTILIZATION BY NESTING SEA TURTLES. Sciences.ucf.edu. https://sciences.ucf.edu/biology/games/wp-content/uploads/sites/13/2012/09/Ecology07.pdf 
Information About Sea Turtles: An Introduction – Sea Turtle Conservancy. (2019). Conserveturtles.org. https://conserveturtles.org/information-about-sea-turtles-an-introduction/ 

PLoS. (2019, April 25). Immense Pacific Coral Reef Survey Shows Green Sea Turtle Populations Increasing. ECO Magazine. https://www.ecomagazine.com/news/coasts/immense-pacific-coral-reef-survey-shows-green-sea-turtle-populations-increasing
“What’s Love Got to Do with Green Sea Turtles and Fish?” Pewtrusts.org, 9 Feb. 2016, www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/articles/2016/02/09/msa-40-whats-love-got-to-do-with-green-sea-turtles-and-fish.
